---
layout: post
title: " The Thrill of Doing Science is That We Don't Know What the Future Will Bring" 
categories: 
- Behavior and Systems Neuroscience
- Cognitive Neuroscience
- Memory
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---
Alice Berners-Lee grew up in Lexington, Massachusetts and attended New York University where she majored in Neural Science and minored in Creative Writing. Alice started her PhD in 2014 at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore under the supervision of Prof. David Foster. In 2017 the Foster lab was recruited to relocate to the University of California, Berkeley.  

{% include figure.html image="/images/Blog_Alice.png" caption="Alice Berners-Lee is a fifth year grad student working under the supervision of Prof. David Foster" %}

**What have you learned about how the brain represents spatial information?**

When an animal runs around, neurons in a particular area of the brain called the hippocampus tell the animal where it is in space. This means that as experimentalists, if we record from enough of these neurons, we could close our eyes and know pretty well where the animal is, just from the brain’s activity. Because we’re deciphering the brain’s code—the meaning of the electrical pulses that neurons use to communicate with each other—we call this procedure “decoding.” One of the most exciting parts of my research is that scientists have been studying this particular neural code—how the hippocampus represents space—for decades, so we understand it remarkably well. That foundation, combined with the particularities of hippocampal anatomy which allow us to record from many neurons simultaneously, means we can decode the brain’s activity with very high accuracy, to the point that you could call it a kind of mind-reading. When the animal is not running around but is standing still (often grooming or eating), these neurons fire seemingly all at once. What we see when we zoom in on these bursts of activity still amazes me: even though the animal is stationary, the hippocampus is actually playing out trajectories through space, at twenty times the speed at which the animal actually moved through the space. This phenomenon, called “replay,” is what I’ve been studying for the last four years of my PhD. 
Replay was first discovered during sleep and was initially posited to support long-term memory and learning. Subsequent studies found that replays also occur when the animal is awake, and that the trajectories depicted by these replay events tend to extend from the animal’s current position to the location of a reward, making them a candidate mechanism for “online” planning as well. Additionally, when there is a change in the environmental layout of rewards, replays reflect those changes, implicating them in learning where rewards are. 
But in order for replays to inform the behavior of the animal, they will have to be heard and processed by other areas in the brain such as areas that control an animal’s choices or movement. In learning what aspects of replay matter to downstream areas that receive that information, we also learn more about which aspects matter for the function of replay. I think the question of how replays in the hippocampus engage the rest of the brain is so interesting and important that I decided to focus on it for my PhD. If we can understand how hippocampal replay interacts with the whole brain, and how that changes across experience and learning, we can better understand the mechanisms and function of mental exploration.

**How will your work have real-world implications?**

One of the most promising applications for the knowledge we uncover about replay is in mental illnesses such as schizophrenia. In mice genetically engineered to have something like schizophrenia, their hippocampal neurons behave abnormally. The neurons “burst” (fire off a handful of electrical pulses in quick succession) more than usual, but their bursts of activity don’t contain ordered replay—instead, the activity appears chaotic and uninterpretable. This deficit in replay is accompanied with deficits in social interaction, locomotor activity and working memory. Because there is still so much to be understood about replay in the typical brain state, we are far from understanding when and how replays get corrupted in disease and dysfunction. However, because replays have been shown to be important for memory and implicated in decision-making, investigating the mechanisms and functions of replay could help us understand more complex aspects of disease states.

**Finally, what advances would you like to see in your field in the next two decades?**

One of the most exciting advances in hippocampal replay is being able to detect these sequences online and be able to causally manipulate their trajectories. There are a lot of exciting hypotheses about why our brains replay information during sleep and awake rest, and causal manipulations are the gold standard to test these hypotheses. For example, when a rat learns to navigate to a hidden reward in a large environment, its replays tend to take trajectories towards that remembered goal location. This implies that replays may be guiding the rat’s subsequent behavior, but we can’t be sure. In order to test the effect of these replays on behavior, we need to decode the neurons’ activity as the animal performs the task, allowing us to interrupt the replays that would be headed to the goal. Then, if the rat isn’t able to navigate to that goal location, we would have more confidence that replays were guiding the rat’s behavior. Another advance I hope to see is to use newly invented recording equipment to investigate whether replay occurs in brain regions outside of the hippocampus. Until recently, technical difficulties in recording from enough neurons simultaneously prevented those experiments. Of course, the thrill of doing science is that we don’t know what the future will bring. It’s exciting to be in such a young field with so many emerging tools and unanswered questions.


